Suspended Between land and sea, the landscape of the project is the lagoon of Venice. It is the landscape of a physical and mental journey through a Territory That has-been saved from the real estate speculation That has recently ravaged Italy. The project tries to tie together all the landscape elements: existing military constructions, traces of the farmland, the beach system and the system infrastructure Which links the island to Venice. The AIMS project to reconstruct the complex system defined by the Maximilian Tower, ITS embankments, the docks, the public landing, the beach and the farmlands insinuated Between These elements, with These Primary Objectives: -The preservation of the monument as a testimonial of unique military defense construction; -The construction of a system of Infrastructures That today guarantee the functionality of These spaces Assigning specific but complementary roles to all the new constructions. All the streets, the bridges, the docks follow the Design Principles used for TMCC: -The examination materials are used for the examination levels of the island earth: stone for the parts Which Can not Be Reached by the flood, For Those bricks of special uses (squares, markets, etc. ..), for the wood parts Whose role Is that link again to water and earth. Streets are made of white asphalt and Their borders are designed by bricks and tamerixes. TMCC is linked, on one side to the terminal 'Beachhead' by a white streight street, 'which is a memory of an ancient railway track. A park has-been designed in the area of the 19 th century 'Bridgehead', 'which' has-been connected by a bridge to the new terminal with a small first-aid hospital, two docks and a covered parking area. The basis of the covered docks stone is made. A brick wall covering plumb Rises up and concludes at the public building. The other parts of the building are again made of wood as well as the brise-Solei Which faces the square brick surface of the terminal where the boat arrives. The lighting system of all the public spaces of the island is designed with thin white tops of the lights are illuminated During Which the night.
